.\" Orthocal - Developed by dgm (dgm@tuta.com)
.\" orthocal/docs/orthocal.1
.Dd April 27, 2026
.Dt ORTHOCAL 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm orthocal
.Nd Orthodox Old Style calendar CLI and local web viewer
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl -db Ar path
.Op Fl -plain
.Op Fl -json
.Ar command
.Op Ar arguments
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads Orthodox Old Style calendar data from a local SQLite database.
It can print day views, focused saints, readings, hymns, search results,
database metadata, and serve or export a read-only web interface.
.Pp
The supported database schema version is 4.
Older databases continue to run with degraded event support.
Newer databases show a compatibility warning in
.Cm info .
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm today
Show the local system date.
.It Cm tomorrow
Show the local system date plus one.
.It Cm date Ar YYYY-MM-DD
Show a specific Gregorian date.
.It Cm saints Ar YYYY-MM-DD
Show saints for a Gregorian date.
.It Cm readings Ar YYYY-MM-DD
Show scripture readings for a Gregorian date.
.It Cm hymns Ar YYYY-MM-DD
Show hymns for a Gregorian date.
.It Cm events Ar YYYY-MM-DD
Show calculated calendar events for a Gregorian date.
.It Cm search Ar category Ar query
Search saints, western saints, primary saints, readings, hymns, or events.
.It Cm info
Show version, database path, schema compatibility, metadata, and counts.
.It Cm update Ar source
Replace the configured database after validation.
Use
.Fl -force
to allow a newer schema version.
.It Cm serve
Start the local read-only web server.
The default address is
.Pa 127.0.0.1:8080 .
.It Cm export-web Ar output_dir
Export a static read-only website.
.It Cm version
Show version and build information.
.It Cm help
Show help text.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ~/.local/share/orthocal/orthodox-calendar.db
Default database path when
.Ev ORTHOCAL_DB
and
.Ev XDG_DATA_HOME
are unset.
.It Pa $XDG_DATA_HOME/orthocal/orthodox-calendar.db
Database path when
.Ev XDG_DATA_HOME
is set.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev ORTHOCAL_DB
Database path used when
.Fl -db
is not passed.
.It Ev XDG_DATA_HOME
Base data directory used when
.Ev ORTHOCAL_DB
is unset.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
orthocal today --db ./orthodox-calendar.db
orthocal date 2026-04-12 --json --db ./orthodox-calendar.db
orthocal events 2026-04-12 --db ./orthodox-calendar.db
orthocal search events Pascha --db ./orthodox-calendar.db
orthocal serve --db ./orthodox-calendar.db
orthocal export-web ./site --db ./orthodox-calendar.db
orthocal update ./orthodox-calendar.db --db ~/.local/share/orthocal/orthodox-calendar.db
orthocal version
.Ed
.Sh AUTHORS
.An dgm Aq Mt dgm@tuta.com
.Sh LICENSE
ISC License.
